# TG5 Workshop (in-person meeting) co-located with the 102nd Meeting of TC39

## Venue

* **Hosting institution:** Department of Computing, University of Turku, Finland
* **Hosts:** [Jaakko Järvi](https://www.utu.fi/en/people/jaakko-jarvi) (University of Turku), Mikhail Barash (University of Bergen), Yulia Startsev (Mozilla)
* **Date:** Monday 10th June 2024
* **Time:** 09:00 to 14:00 EEST (Europe/Helsinki)
		
## Programme of the Workshop

|Time|Topic|
|---|---|
|09:00 - 09:15|Welcome & TG5 Introduction|
|09:15 - 10:00|Coffee and mingling|
|10:00 - 11:00|TG5 Discussion: [Multiway Dataflow Constraint Systems](https://hotdrink.github.io/hotdrink/) and TC39 [Signals proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-signals)|
|11:00 - 11:15|Break|
|11:15 - 12:00|Panel with TC39 members (Daniel Ehrenberg, Michael Ficarra, Shane F. Carr): "How does JavaScript evolve?"|
|12:00 - 12:30|Talk by [Jaakko Järvi](https://scholar.google.fi/citations?user=0r1JzFEAAAAJ&hl=fi): "A decade of C++ standardization"|
|12:30 - 14:00|Lunch & Networking|

## TG5 Discussion session at 10:00-11:00

### Discussion participants

|Name|Abbreviation|Organization|
|----|------------|------------|
|Jaakko Järvi|JJ|University of Turku|
|Daniel Ehrenberg|DE|Bloomberg|
|Michael Ficarra|MF|F5|
|Shane F. Carr|SFC|Google|
|Juho Vepsäläinen|JV|Aalto University|
|Fatih Uzunoglu|FU|University of Turku|

### Notes

JJ: _(presented a summary of HotDrink)_

DE: _(presented a summary of the Signals proposal)_

SFC: Does this support async computation?

DE: Signal evaluton mechanism is synchronous. But we do have some privimitves that are designed to support asynchrony. Watcher calls callbacks when a signal becomes potentially dirty. A reaction is scheduled for later. Chain asynchronous reactions in an unstructed ways means erroneous code. For `Computed`s, you can construct an async graph using signal actions. If you want to react when noone is listening to you, it's psosible with unwatch.

SFC: Potential problems with a need to recompute the graph.

DE: In this API, the goal is that it's a shared base to be used in multiple policies on how to handle async. Would be great to have a scheduler that's built-in in the system and can be shared.

JV: What about undo-redo, time travel?

DE: Time travel is perhaps the most advanced case of transactions. If you want to model react suspense, you need transcations. We are looking for algorithms for transcations. These are things folks can work on as open-source contributors. Library `signals.utils` constructs reactive data structures out of the base signals. 

JV: event source: scrolling, show progress in top, in reactive systen. Easy way to hook it into on-scroll event?

DE: Two ways to model this: every time you get on-scroll, you update. Scroll handlers are a source of performance problems. If you have a signal that represents the state of the scroll, you can implement another dependent signal. More efficient.

SFC: HotDrink has cyclic graphs, but signal is explicitly acyclic. Is there a way to model a cyclic graph in signals?

DE: there is a dirty way used in react (antipattern). Would be interesting to understand why people still see this as an intuitive way to implement. We do need a proper planning algorithm. Each variable is modelled as a computed signal; visible in the `Computed`s. That could be a bridge.

FU: if you have an event loop, can you process queue waiting, can you evaluate all of them, or manually?

DE: it's the code you put on top of the signals core which will be responsible for handling asynchrony. Watcher.

FU: so all signals can be in a list?

DE: Yes.

JV: will the proposal have value otside of the browser?

DE: What's the use case? Build tool using signal algorithms to figure out the minimal set of things to rebuild.

JV: (?)

DE: Signals can be used as a synchronouzaion mechanism between the server and the client. Discuss the use cases in the repo issues.

JJ: When you set up a chain of signals, the whole graph computed synchronusly?

DE: get - synchronous; setting a chain - iteratively, so can be asyncronously

JJ: can you say anything in relation to promise chains?

DE: similarities. A different thing: promises - the function coloring problem. With signals, it's implictly, global var tracking the dependencies, you operate in the world of normal JS values. The other thing: promise: `.then` - from the definition to the usage, signals: (?)

JV: (?)

DE: JS code between every async call, you can count on it being uninterrupted (cooperative multitasking)

JJ: coalsecing events. We looked into flushable promises. When you do debouncing, throttling events, chains of dependencies. (?) You can tell the promise "hurry up". 

JJ: _(explained flushable promises)_

JV: abort control lock can be used

DE: what happens if the response comes before the user finished typing?

JV, DE: glitches in reactive programming

JV: for every transition, they forced to model everything. can we take a state machine and implement it using signals?

DE: implementing `XState` with signals. Another OSS contribution opportunity.

JJ: _(on a whiteboard: an example of a glitch)_

DE: formal methods to verify - to enumerate signals algoithms whcih will be glitch-free

JJ, DE: flushable promises use case

DE: other solutions might exist: `tee`, too awkward to use in praftice. Another: modeling this with signals: signals can evaluate to a promise. They also have an invalidation mechanism where you (?) the underlying source and the (?) knows that they are no longer valid. Can we use the invalidation mechaisns here because it solves the coloring problen.

JJ: _(example of flushable promises)_

JV: what happens if the computation(s) in the chain fails?

JJ: didn't thought about it

DE: (?)

FU: rapid burst of events

JJ: event caosliscneing: throttling (throw away events - you only handle every 100 ms), debouncing (events in a row - every new event within that period - you are reseting the timer)

JJ: there is ongoing work on adding the concepts of observables

SFC: (?)

JJ: (?)
