# TC39-TG5-2 2024-04-24

**Remote attendees:**
| Name              | Abbreviation | Organization |
| ----------------- | ------------ | ------------ |
| Mikhail Barash    | MBH          | UiB          |
| Jack Works        | JWK          | Sujitech     |
| Istvan Sebestyen  | IS           | Ecma         |

## Meeting:

* Intro (The meeting is a mirroring of the TG5-1 meeting)
* Areas of investigation
* Discussion:
	* [IS] is very interested in AI-based tools in standardization. Documentation is important for Ecma. IS talked about an experiment in transcribing TC54 meetings from recorded videos and using an LLM to summarize. Should TC39 try using a similar approach and then make a decision on its feasibility and applicability?
	* [IS] There is a “competition” between SDOs and one of the factors is: which of the SDOs will be the first one to successfully adopt AI-based tools. Ecma is in a good position as a testbed, especially in the ICT standardization. TG5 is a good mechanism to try out new tools.
	* [IS & MBH] Using AI-based tools to summarize a standard.
	* [MBH] A group of University of Bergen’s students has been exploring implementation of a tool to search TC39 Meeting Notes (using LLMs). Example of a feature: summarize all utterances by a particular delegate about a particular proposal during the last N meetings.
	* [MBH] Previous discussion with YSV on using an LLM for navigation in a standard.
	* [IS] Important to make a difference between AI for the “subject matter aspects” of specifications vs. AI as a helping mechanism in the standardization process. Important for Ecma: long-term archival, simple tools are preferred.
	* [IS] How does Ecma and TC39 and the language community work together?
	* [MBH & IS] Standardization as a driver of language evolution.
