# TC39-TG5-3 2024-05-29

**Remote attendees:**
| Name              | Abbreviation | Organization     |
| ----------------- | ------------ | ---------------- |
| Mikhail Barash    | MBH          | UiB              |
| Yulia Startsev    | YSV          | Mozilla          |
| Alan Schmitt      | AS           | Inria            |
| Eemeli Aro        | EAO          | Mozilla          |
| Florian Merz      | FM           | Mozilla          |
| Istvan Sebestyen  | IS           | Ecma             |
| Jack Works        | JWK          | Sujitech         |
| James Hobson      | JH           | UiB              |
| Juho Vepsäläinen  | JV           | Aalto University |
| Michael Coblenz   | MC           | UCSD             |
| Michael Dyck      |              |                  |
| Michael Ficarra   | MF           | F5               |

## Meeting:

* Housekeeping
	* Introductions
	* Publication of the Notes (these notes)
		* After each TG5 meeting, notes will be published in the TG5 repo.
	* [Meeting Cadence](https://github.com/tc39/tg5/issues/2)
		* TG5 meetings will be held at 4PM-5PM European time, once a month.
* Subjects
	* MessageFormat 2.0 Study request
		* EAO: presented the summary of the issue.
		* YSV: This is specified in another standardization body.
		* MF: Regarding envisioned questions: what questions do we want _answered_, rather than what questions do we want asked.
		* EAO: A fundamental question: does this syntax feel nice when it’s used for its purpose, and what settings would you use this syntax in?
		* MC: Usability. Interview (the questions in the GitHub issue can be used as starting points). Instead of asking the users questions in a hypothetical setting, conduct a user study: give a candidate design and observe (e.g., what mistakes users make when given certain tasks).
		* YSV: TC39 blocked the proposal on the basis of lack of maturity. It’s not easy to deprecate things for the web. A study to help determine how well this syntax solves a given set of problems it was designed to solve, and how well the users respond. Cf.: a study on trusted types.
		* JWK: Question on how Message Format works for other software stacks
		* EAO: the data model for MessageFormat 2 seems to be universally applicable to all syntaxes. It’s relatively easy to transfer the data model from one representation to another.
		* JWK: this is approachable, if MessageFormat 2 doesn’t have features not representable in other formats.
		* EAO: bidirectional transformation
		* YSV, MF: how to make this actionable within TG5? What questions do we want to answer for ourselves? What are we testing? What will make TC39 more confident to advance the proposal? The meta question for TC39 is whether Message Format 2 can be integrated in the web.
		* EAO: authors of Message Format 2 message will only use it occasionally - is the syntax suitable for that purpose?
		* MC (in chat): (1) to what extent does the proposal meet the functional needs? (2) how effective is the design at helping users achieve their needs (when their needs align with the features that have been selected)?
		* YSV: this is infrequently used syntax, we don’t want regex’s sophistication
		* YSV: next steps: continue the collaboration with the proposal champions.
		* MC: interested in helping
		* YSV, EAO: aiming at Unicode CLDR Autumn/Spring release. The Message Format working group has weekly calls.
		* MC, YSV, EAO: let’s have a break-out meeting with the Message Format working group in 3 weeks. For the next TG5 meeting, we will make an update. For the next break-out session and the TG5 meeting, Eemeli will share the invitation to the meetings to relevant folks.
	* [MF] Editors’ work on refining the formalism of the spec
		* This agenda item has been postponed until the next meeting.
	* [FM] training an LLM on specifications and generating documentation
		* YSV: Discussion of LLM for specifications has been brought up by members of TG5. Using LLMs to generate answers to user queries for MDN is a project taken on by Mozilla. We’ve invited Florian to talk about this
		* FM: We are able to answer user queries using LLMs trained on professional writers interpretation of the specs. It generates answers, and examples. But, (the important part), it gets details wrong. Especially for new spec data that hasn’t been processed by a human. The LLM will invent in this case based on other languages.
		* FM: Concrete example: Set methods were generated from the spec. It got wrong: what kind of object do set methods operate on, on a set like? Etc.
		* FM: As a tool for a technical writer who post-processes: It is super helpful for bootstrapping. It can really speed up things. But you need an expert who would be able to edit the output. We can’t trust it.
		* MC: have you tried combining this with synthesis? (potential [contact](https://cseweb.ucsd.edu/~npolikarpova/), [Related paper, not synthesis based](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.09541), and a more [closely-related paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15880)
		* JH: Interested in the productivity difference, worked on traffic control software and we were using AI to write transcripts. Editors were less likely to find mistakes made by an AI than when they wrote them, themselves. Have you tried to quantify speedups?
		* FM: Not yet, on the agenda to look into this
		* FM: TODO: train a model on the spec and translated by hand results
	* TG5 Charter
		* MF: What are the resources that are lacking to make TG5 a success?
		* YSV: I think the biggest risk is that we don’t have enough time/people for the amount of work that goes through TC39
		* MBH: This is the goal of building the community around TG5
		* MC: two conferences where people may be interested:
			* https://2024.plateau-workshop.org
			* https://2024.splashcon.org/home/hatra-2024
