# TC39-TG5-4 2024-06-26

**Remote attendees:**
| Name              | Abbreviation | Organization     |
| ----------------- | ------------ | ---------------- |
| Mikhail Barash    | MBH          | UiB              |
| Yulia Startsev    | YSV          | Mozilla          |
| Michael Ficarra   | MF           | F5               |
| Jesse Alama       | JMN          | Igalia           |
| Michael Dyck      | MD           |                  |
| Juho Vepsäläinen  | JV           | Aalto University |
| Michael Coblenz   | MC           | UCSD             |
| Eemeli Aro        | EAO          | Mozilla          |

## Meeting:

### Subject: Editors' work on refining the formalism of the spec

MF: (presentation)
  * [(§5.2.5)](https://262.ecma-international.org/#sec-mathematical-operations) numeric types
  * [(§6.2.2)](https://262.ecma-international.org/#sec-list-and-record-specification-type) proliferation of records (reducing core concepts)
  * [(§6.2.1)](https://262.ecma-international.org/#sec-enum-specification-type) spec enums
  * [(§5.2.7)](https://262.ecma-international.org/#sec-identity) identity
  * [(§6.2.4)](https://262.ecma-international.org/#sec-completion-record-specification-type) explicit completion record handling
  * [(§6.2.8)](https://262.ecma-international.org/#sec-abstract-closure) abstract closures
  * AO type signatures
  * explicit, principled integration points
	  - host hooks
	  - (Annex B) step replacements for normative optional / legacy
	  - [(#2952)](https://github.com/tc39/ecma262/pull/2952) feature flags for joint requirements

YSV: [executable specification]

MF: [editors' use of the KAIST's tool]

JMN: I'd love to see those math functions nailed down a bit more, but maybe that horse has left the barn?

MF: [we review manually]

MF: working on math functions (not as an editor). Fully define math sqr, other math functions,
plan on introducing constraints on them, bounds on return values, monotonicity

MC (in chat): It seems like really doing this would require translating the whole thing to a formal specification (e.g. in Coq).

MD (in chat): Another barrier to machine execution is that it's difficult to extract the characteristics
of the intrinsic objects and the relations between them.

MF (in chat): It sounds like part of the problem is that the machine-readable specifications approaches are too hard for humans to read.
I wonder if research could make machine-interpretable specs easier for humans to read.

YSV: Are there any risks from how differently the specifications are written (natural language vs. formal spec)?

MF: [the way they are written is converging]

YSV: What about HTML spec?

MF: [entire phrases in a natural language are used in the spec]

YSV: getting used to HTML spec, natural languages phrases. Is it worthwhile to have a DSL
for standardization of the web platform?

MF: made a framework for specification. difficult to make it language-agnostic

YSV: cross-specification. intentional backwards incompatibility.

YSV: one other project is WebIDL. We at Mozilla have an automatic rewriter of interfaces to WebIDL.

MF: yes, would be nice to consider the implications. webIDL integration

MC (in chat): Do we know much about how the spec is used? e.g. who reads it and what questions they have?

MF: considered consumers who reads the spec -- profiles of readers of the spec

JMN (in chat): for new, in-progress JS features I've received feedback from JS engine implementors
who are following the spec text basically line-by-line just to get a first implementation done.
They've spotted ambiguities, errors.

YSV: who is visiting the spec - we don't have the statistics.
There isn't much guidance on how to read the spec. 

MC: impossible to have a natural language specification precise 

EAO (in chat): AFAIK, the ECMA spec visitor numbers are only for
https://ecma-international.org/publications-and-standards/standards/ecma-262/,
and not https://tc39.es/ecma262/

YSV: many people struggle with WASM spec, especially the proofs

MF: yes, they have a flipped priority of consumers compared to ECMAScript
