# TG5 Workshop (in-person meeting) co-located with the 111th Meeting of TC39 (Tokyo, Japan, November 2025)

## Venue

* **Hosts:** Mikhail Barash (University of Bergen), Michael Ficarra (F5)
* **Date:** Monday 17th November 2025
* **Time:** 12:30 to 16:00 JST
* **Location:** Bloomberg Tokyo Office
		
## Programme of the Workshop

|Time|Topic|Presenter(s)|
|---|---|---|
|12:30-12:45|Welcome to TG5 Workshop|Mikhail Barash, Michael Ficarra|
|TBD|Integrating Static Optimization and Dynamic Nature in JavaScript|[Tadashi Saito](https://github.com/tadd) (The University of Electro-Communications)|
|TBD|Towards Understanding Trends and Patterns in JavaScript Language Feature Usages and Monorepo Refactoring|[Dawei Chen](https://github.com/thisrabbit) ([University of Tokyo](https://www.csg.ci.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp/en/members.html))|
|TBD|TBD|TBD|
|TBD|TBD|TBD|

## Abstracts

### Integrating Static Optimization and Dynamic Nature in JavaScript (T. Saito)

The class definitions and class field declarations in the ECMAScript standard suggest that the JavaScript engines could be optimized
like class-based static languages. This paper focuses on two well-known optimizations. One is method specialization, using fixed
offsets to access properties. The other is prior hidden class construction, which involves creating runtime class-like structures
called hidden classes before creating instances of the classes. However, implementing such optimizations into JavaScript faces difficulties
because of its dynamic features. We point out three difficulties that must be overcome and propose reasonable solutions. We implemented these
optimizations and solutions in QuickJS, a small, practical JavaScript engine, and obtained promising results.

### Towards Understanding Trends and Patterns in JavaScript Language Feature Usages and Monorepo Refactoring (D. Chen)

JavaScript and its ecosystem offer a wide range of language features, providing developers with flexible ways of
writing and managing their code bases. This talk is two-folded. Firstly, we present an empirical study (accepted by ICSE 2026)
that scanned a large number of open-source JavaScript repositories to find out trends and patterns regarding how developers
use various language features. Then, we present our on-going work that fill the gap of quantifying and understanding the
refactoring and continuous evolution of JavaScript Monorepo, a relatively new repository management paradigm.
